AI-ML-DS Journey • SQL Learning 
AI-ML-DS Learning Journey
Daily Learning Report — SQL Fundamentals
Date 20 August 2026
Learning Track Artificial Intelligence / Machine Learning / Data Science
Current Module SQL & Relational Databases
Focus Database fundamentals, tables, queries, CREATE TABLE, and constraints
1. What I Learned Today
1. What is a Database? — Understood the purpose of a database as an organized system for
storing, managing, and retrieving data efficiently.
2. SQL vs NoSQL — Learned the basic difference between relational SQL databases and
non-relational NoSQL databases, including their different data models and typical use cases.
3. What is SQL? — Learned that SQL (Structured Query Language) is used to interact with
relational databases for creating, reading, updating, and deleting data.
4. What is a Table? — Understood that a relational database stores data in tables made up of
rows and columns.
5. Database Installation — Went through the initial database setup process for Windows
and reviewed the installation process for Mac.
6. Creating the First Database — Practiced creating a database and understood the basic structure
of a database environment.
7. Creating the First Table — Practiced creating a table with columns and data types.
8. Database Queries — Learned the role of SQL queriesin communicating with and
manipulating a database.
9. CREATE TABLE — Learned the basic syntax and purpose of the CREATE TABLE
statement.
10. Constraints — Introduced to constraints that enforce rules on table data and help maintain
data integrity.
2. Core SQL Concepts Covered
Concept Understanding
Database A structured collection of data that can be stored, managed, and queried.
SQL A language used to interact with relational databases.
Table A database object that organizes data into rows and columns.
Row A single record in a table.
Column A field/attribute describing a particular type of data.
Query An SQL instruction used to retrieve or manipulate database information.
AI-ML-DS Journey • SQL Learning • Page 2
Concept Understanding
CREATE TABLE SQL command used to create a new table and define its columns.
Constraint A rule applied to table data to maintain validity and integrity.
3. SQL Syntax Practiced
A basic table-creation statement follows this structure:
CREATE TABLE table_name (
column_name data_type,
column_name data_type
);
The important idea is that a table definition specifies the columns, their data types, and—when
required—constraints that control what data can be stored.
4. Constraints — Initial Understanding
• PRIMARY KEY — Identifies each record uniquely.
• NOT NULL — Prevents a column from accepting NULL values.
• UNIQUE — Ensures values in a column are not duplicated.
• DEFAULT — Provides a default value when no value is supplied.
• CHECK — Applies a condition that values must satisfy.
• FOREIGN KEY — Defines a relationship between tables and helps maintain referential
integrity.
5. Key Takeaways
• A relational database organizes information using tables.
• SQL is the primary language used to work with relational databases.
• Tables consist of rows and columns, and each column has a defined data type.
• SQL queries are the mechanism for interacting with database data and structures.
• Constraints are important because they prevent invalid or inconsistent data from entering a table.
• Today's learning establishes the foundation needed for SELECT queries, INSERT, UPDATE,
DELETE, filtering, joins, aggregation, and database design.
6. Next Learning Focus
Continue with practical SQL operations: INSERT, SELECT, UPDATE, DELETE, WHERE
conditions, ORDER BY, LIMIT, aggregate functions, GROUP BY, HAVING, and JOIN
operations. The goal is to move from understanding database structure to confidently querying
real datasets.
Learning status: SQL fundamentals completed for today's session. This report is prepared as a
AI-ML-DS Journey • SQL Learning • Page 3
daily learning record for the AI-ML-DS journey and can be committed to GitHub as part of the
learning history.